[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: All right.
Well, last class, we started to
talk about the Fourier method
in Euclidean space in R2.
And the big goal for the class
is to digest the Fourier method,
finish that story, but also
just to digest it in general.
And then after that,
if there's time,
we'll start to introduce
sieve theory, which
has a extremely parallel story.
But that was developed by a
different group of people,
and with somewhat
different goals.
OK, so to digest
the Fourier method,
I wanted to go back for a
second to the finite field
Fourier method, where everything
is a little bit cleaner,
and to make a point about it.
OK, so our main lemma in the
finite field case was this.
If you have a set
of lines in FQ2
and then you add up their
characteristic functions,
then it has a big
constant part, and then
a small, high-frequency part.
And then the conclusion is
that f is f0 plus f high,
where f0 is a constant
function, which
is the number of lines over q.
And from that, you can
compute its L2 norm.
L2 squared is number
of lines squared.
And f high means 0.
And we have a bound
for its L2 norm.
OK, so one thing that
you can get out of this
is a bound for the L2 norm of f.
If you add these together,
you get a bound for the L2
norm of f.
And it's worth saying that
that bound for the L2 norm of f
has a elementary proof that's
really simpler than this.
Let me show it for comparison
to help put this in perspective.
OK, so let's call this,
elementary L2 bound.
OK, so there's a first
lemma that if you
have two different
lines, then you
take the sum over x, L1 of x,
L2 of x, this is at most 1.
Could do that.
It's just saying that two lines
intersect in at most one point.
OK, and we can use this
to make an L2 estimate.
So here's the L2 estimate.
If f is the sum L in L, of L of
x, then f L2 squared is bounded
by the number of lines squared
plus number of lines times q.
Here's the proof.
So f L2 squared is
the sum over L1 and L2
of sum on x, L1 of x, L2 of x.
And now each one of these sums,
we can control with this lemma.
All right.
But you have to be a
little bit careful.
If L1 is equal to L2, that's
a different situation.
A line intersects itself
in a lot of points.
So we're going to
split up this sum.
So it's the sum L1 equals
L2 plus the sum L1 does not
equal L2.
OK, so here, we have
only L choices for L1,
or only L choices
appear in this sum.
And each one of
them contributes q.
And then over here, we have L
squared choices for the lines.
But each one of
them contributes 1.
So that's the proof.
All right.
So if you compare
this with this,
something looks kind
of similar, right?
We get an L2 bound up there
of L squared plus Lq that
matches L squared plus Lq that
we get here with this quite
simple argument.
OK, but the main lemma has
more information than that.
Well, there's actually
really two cases.
If q is bigger than
the number of lines,
then this term dominates here,
and this term dominates here.
And in that situation,
the main lemma
doesn't really have much
more information than this,
because the function
fh is not that special.
But the other regime is
that the number of lines
is much bigger than q.
So this dominates that.
And in that situation,
most of the L2 norm
is coming from f0, which is very
special because it's constant.
So the main lemma has an
important piece of information
beyond this that when
we have many lines,
this sum is almost constant.
And then it's a constant plus
something that's much smaller.
OK, so that is also true in
spirit for the main lemma
in the real case.
But the main lemma in the
real case is a little bit more
complicated.
So I wanted to do this
first, and then we
could look for the analogous
thing in the more complicated
real case.
OK, so what did the main
lemma say in the real case?
Main lemma in the real case.
So now, we have T is a
set of 1 by R rectangles.
And psi T is a
smooth approximation
of the characteristic
function of t.
And the exact meaning
of that is explained
in agonizing detail
on the homework.
OK, and then we have
a function, which
is the sum over all the T and
T of this smooth characteristic
function of T.
OK, now our bounds are
going to depend on how
these tubes are clustered.
So N sub T of R is the
maximum over T tilde
is a 2 little r by 2 big
R rectangle, or tube,
of the number of tubes in there.
So picture this.
We have this T tilde.
Let me see how many little
tubes are in T tilde.
OK, so those are the
hypotheses of the main lemma.
And then the conclusion
is that you can write f,
you can break it up into pieces
of different frequencies.
So the pieces are labeled by
a sort of a width parameter,
little r, which is a dyadic
number between scale 1
and scale capital R of f sub
little r, where the f sub
little r has two
good properties.
It has a frequency support.
The support of f little
r hat is contained
in the ball of radius 1 over r.
And it has an L2 norm bound.
f sub little r L2 squared is
bounded by the number of tubes
times this packing, clustering,
parameter at the scale
little r times big
R over little r.
OK.
OK, now one thing you
could take away from this
is you could take away
from it a bound for the L2
norm of f by just
adding up all of these.
And like before, that
bound for the L2 norm of f
has a simpler proof.
And for context for
understanding this,
I'm going to show you
this simpler proof.
Yes.
AUDIENCE: Are the
fr's orthogonal?
LAWRENCE GUTH: The
fr's are orthogonal.
Yeah, the fr's are orthogonal.
If we didn't know
they were orthogonal,
we would lose a little bit.
We'd have to do Cauchy-Schwarz
to compute the L2 norm of f.
But the amount
that we would lose
would be like a log r,
which is relatively minor.
Yeah.
OK.
OK, so let's do an
elementary L2 bound.
All right.
So like before, when we
expand out the L2 norm,
we'll have to
estimate the integral
of 1 tube times another tube.
But one tube times another tube
is a little bit more complicated
than one line
times another line.
Two lines always
intersect in a point,
but two tubes intersect in
a different amount of area
depending upon the
angle between them.
So we're going to
keep track of that.
All right.
So let's make a definition.
The width, r, in
between T1 and T2
is the minimum r,
so that there exists
a 2 little r by 2 big
R rectangle T tilde
that contains them both.
OK, so if this is
T1, and this is T2,
then that would be T tilde.
And that would be r.
OK, so now, if I want to
integrate T1 of x, T2 of x, dx,
that's going to be about big
R over the little r associated
to these two tubes.
Why?
Well, the integral is the
area of their overlap.
And if I'll sort of sketch
their overlap over here--
it's not a great picture.
This is around 1 because it's
contained in one of the tubes.
And this axis here is
like big R over little r.
As little r gets smaller,
they overlap more and more.
OK, good.
So now, we can make an L2 bound.
Let's say that the
integral of f squared
is bounded by the sum over
little r dyadic of T times N sub
T of little r times
big R over little r.
OK, and the proof
is that we'll just
break up this sum as a bunch
of integrals like this, group
them according to the
value of little r,
and we'll see what happens.
This is what's
going to fall out.
So here's the proof.
So the integral of f
squared is the sum T1 and T2
in our set of tubes integral
of T1 of x, T2 of x.
Now this integral
here, it depends
on the value of little r.
So let's group these by
the value of little r.
So that's the sum over little
r dyadic sum over T1 and T2
with that value.
So the R associated to T1
and T2 would be about this r.
And then I have this integral,
which I can bound by the lemma.
So I get big R over little r.
OK, now I need to know how many
pairs of tubes are in this list
here.
Well, I can choose T1.
And T1, as far as I
know, could be anything.
So I have number of
tubes choices for T1.
But once I choose T1, I need
to choose another tube, T2,
that fits into the
same rectangle with T1.
So the number of
choices for that
is about N sub T of little r.
That's what it's measuring.
So this is bounded by sum over
r dyadic of number of tubes
and N sub T of r
big R over little r.
OK, great.
So let's compare this with this.
This is exactly what we
get by just adding up
all those L2 norms
for the f sub r.
OK, so this proof
is a lot easier
than the proof of the main
lemma that we did last time.
Let's compare the L2
bound and the main lemma.
If I were to erase this
information in the main lemma,
then all that would be
left is the L2 bound.
But there is this information.
And this is helpful.
This is telling
us something more.
OK, now depending upon what
we know about this thing here,
different terms might
dominate this sum.
If it so happens that the
term little r equals 1,
has the biggest
contribution here,
then we don't learn very
much because our information
about the support of f1 hat is
the same as the information we
already had about
the support of f hat.
So we'd have nothing new.
But it may well happen that
the term where this is biggest
has little r much larger.
And then f little r has this
frequency support condition.
It gives it some structure,
some extra information there
that's going to help us.
So let's talk
about, what does it
mean about the function f
little r that its frequency is
supported there?
So intuition,
we're going to call
this the locally-constant
intuition,
says that if I have
some function g
and the support of
g hat is contained
in the ball of radius 1
over r, then the function
g is approximately constant
on balls of radius r.
So if the support of g hat is
in the ball of radius 1 over r,
then g hat is a combination
of waves, cosine waves,
where all of the cosine waves
have frequency at most 1 over r.
So each one of
those cosine waves
is not changing very much
on balls of radius r.
So it's sort of
intuitively plausible
that after we add
them up, also, we'll
get something that is roughly
constant on balls of radius r.
We'll come back
in a little while
and make a precise
statement about this.
OK, so based on this, let me
make a picture illustrating
main lemma r.
Main lemma and the real case.
OK, so OK.
So this will be, well, this will
be like each one of those lines
is going to be a 1 by r tube.
So I may have a
whole bunch of them
over here sort of like this, and
a whole bunch of them over here
sort of like this.
And over here in this
part of the board,
I might have some that are not
so clumped into thick tubes.
They might look
sort of like this.
All right.
So over here, a picture
I wanted to give you
is that I put so many
thin strokes of chalk, one
by our rectangles, that
they sort of smooshed
on top of each other, and they
produced, like, a thick stroke.
And so this part over here
might be dominated by f of r.
So maybe this scale
might be r and f
sub r be sort of a sum of
this blob and that blob.
And on the other, so this over
here in blue would be f sub r.
And on the other hand, this
over here would be F sub 1.
All of this stuff is
pretty high frequency.
OK, and notice that
this f sub r is
kind of roughly constant
on any ball of radius r.
And so if I were to visualize
the set where F is big,
well, there might be some
bits in here where F is big.
But then there also might
be some piece in here
where F is big.
OK, so over here, this
is where F sub 1 is big.
And over here, this is
where F sub r is big.
All right.
And now, the kind of
trade off that happens
is we might have a very strong
bound for the L2 norm of f1.
And so that bound tells me
that this set where f1 is big
is small.
And then we have a bound
for the L2 norm of fr.
It might not be
such a good bound.
It might be bigger.
But on the other hand, fr
has this nice structure
that it is constant on balls.
So the set where
fr is big is group
is clumped into these big balls.
And so that gives us--
So the area might be
larger than this area.
But the fact that
it's clumped gives us
some other geometric
information about it.
It's kind of simpler.
OK, so let's pause there.
That was recapping the main
lemma in the real case.
And I sort of tried to have a
picture of what it's telling us.
OK, OK.
So the next thing that we should
do is this is sort of nice,
but it is not a actual
precise math statement.
So in order to really
make use of this idea,
we need to now
replace this intuition
by an actual precise thing.
So let's do that.
OK, so here's a precise
version of the intuition.
OK, OK, so how do we use the
fact that the support of g hat
is contained in something
like B of 1 over r?
There's a nice trick for using
this, which goes like this.
So suppose I have a function,
eta so that eta of c
is 1 for all the c in the
ball of radius 1 over r.
There are many
such functions eta,
and probably the
most useful kind
is to suppose that eta is also
smooth and compactly supported.
OK, so g hat is equal
to g hat times eta,
because g hat is
supported on this ball,
and eta is 1 on this ball.
And now, I can take the inverse
Fourier transform of this,
and I get that g is g
convolved with eta check.
OK, so this follows from, and
is almost equivalent to, this.
But it's often a little
bit easier to work with.
So next to work with
this, we should figure out
a little bit what this
function eta check is like.
So properties of eta check.
OK, so for one thing, eta
check of x is less than r
to the minus 2 in the plane.
That just follows from
the triangle inequality.
To compute eta check,
we integrate eta
times the complex exponential.
And eta has size 1, and
it's supported on this ball.
So we get this.
But in addition to that, if x is
large, then we get cancelation.
So the next thing is that eta
check of x decays rapidly.
So I'll write something
precise in a second.
Decays rapidly if x
is bigger than that.
And so the reason
for that is eta check
of x is the integral eta
of C e to the 2 pi i xc dc.
And we can bound this integral
by integrating by parts.
And this is a nice
and smooth thing.
And if x is bigger than this, we
integrate by parts many times,
we get a strong
estimate for this.
OK, the estimate has
the following shape.
I start with an r
to the minus 2 just
to compare to what I had there.
And then I have x over r.
And I can put here
any exponent I like.
But negative 1,000
will be fine for us.
So if x is more than a
teeny bit bigger than r,
this thing is very small.
OK.
All right.
So now let me set C sub r
to be the norm of eta check.
And so C sub r has bounds
that we just computed.
So C sub r of x is bounded
by r to the minus 2.
And it's rapidly decaying
if x is much bigger than r.
And now, we can state a lemma.
So if the support of
g hat is contained
in the ball of radius
1 over r, then the norm
of g of x is bounded by the
norm of g convolved with Cr x.
And the proof is basically
just what we have.
So we started with g
hat is g hat times eta.
And so g is g convolved
with eta check.
Now take the
triangle inequality.
The norm of g is less than or
equal to the norm of g convolved
with the norm of eta check.
And that's the proof.
The norm of eta
check is called Cr.
OK, and since we're
going to eventually
be thinking about
L2 norms, it is
helpful to have a tiny
variant of this lemma,
where we have the
norm of g squared
instead of the norm of g.
It's sort of convenient
to prove it ahead of time
instead of in the
middle of what's coming.
So lemma 2.
If the support of
g hat is contained
in the ball of radius 1 over
r, then the norm of g squared
is bounded by the norm of g
squared convolved with Cr.
OK, so before we do
the rigorous proof,
let me say something about
how I think about this.
So this here says that the
norm of g is bounded by--
this is sort of like
taking an average.
It's like the norm
of g is bounded
by the average value of the
norm of G on a ball of radius r.
And then if you had
that by Cauchy-Schwarz,
you would also have that
the norm of g squared
was bounded by the
average of the norm of g
squared on the ball.
OK, so that's what
we'll write down now.
So the norm of g of x squared
is bounded by the first lemma
by the norm of g convolved
with Cr at x squared.
If I write out what
this convolution is,
it's the integral norm of g of x
minus y, Cr of y dy all squared.
And now, I can do
a Cauchy-Schwarz.
I want to do a Cauchy-Schwarz
to get this guy squared
with one of those.
So when I do my
Cauchy-Schwarz, my first factor
will be integral norm of g
squared x minus y Cr of y.
And my second factor will just
be the integral Cr of y dy.
So you get to see that this
is a valid Cauchy-Schwarz.
The total number of
exponents of g is 2.
exponents of C is 2.
And that matches what's
on the other side.
And now, this thing
here is bounded
by 1, which follows from our
bounds for how it behaves,
and which goes along
with the intuition
that this integral is 1.
And so this convolution
is like doing an average.
OK, and this thing here is
just the right-hand side.
This is g squared
convolved with C. OK,
so this is the way we will
rigorously make use of the fact
that fr has frequency in there.
And it corresponds
visually to this picture
that I think I'll erase now
that fr looks of like this.
And the places where it's big
consists of some blobs of balls
of radius r.
OK.
So now, we can
use our main lemma
to prove some projection
theory estimates.
All right.
So our setup is
that we have x is
a set of unit balls in
the two-dimensional ball
of radius r.
D is the set of directions.
So it's a subset of S1,
which is 1 over r separated.
And S measures the size of the
biggest projection of x in here.
So it's the maximum over all
the thetas in my direction set
of the theta projection of x.
So that's our setup.
And we're going to try to bound
these different quantities
in terms of how the
directions and how
the spheres are clustered.
So remember, Nx of r is the
maximum over all possible center
C of the amount of x in the
ball of center C and radius r.
And similarly, N sub d of
rho is the maximum over arcs
and S1 of length rho of the
number of directions in the arc.
So that's our setup.
And the projection theory
estimate that comes from this
method, I'll call it theorem
2R, theorem 2 in the real case,
says that if we have this setup,
then the number of directions is
bounded by S big R over x times
the maximum over little r of Nx
of little r ND of little r over
big R over little r squared.
OK, so this is a
little bit messy.
And we'll eventually
make some hypotheses
that allow it to simplify it.
But just notice for
now that this estimate
takes account of how the set
of directions is clustered.
And it takes account
of how-- sorry.
It takes account of how the set
x of unit balls is clustered.
And it takes account of how the
set of directions is clustered.
OK, so the proof follows
the idea of the proof
we did in finite fields, and
makes use of the main lemma.
And here is our setup.
So for every direction
in our direction set,
let's say T theta,
is a set of at most,
S. We could say exactly S.
1 by r tubes T that cover x.
So this projection
has size S. Then
looking at the fibers
of the projections,
I get S tubes that
cover my set x.
OK, then T, my
master set of tubes,
will be the union over
all the directions.
T theta.
And f is going to
be the sum over all
these tubes of the smoothed
characteristic function
of the tube.
OK, so we observe
that for every x
in x, f of x is at least
the number of directions.
All right.
So now, we use our main lemma
and we break up f into these
different fr's.
We use main lemma.
And there are only
logarithmically many different
choices of r.
And so one of them has to
make a pretty big contribution
at each of these points.
And so I can choose r so that--
all right.
So I have x times D squared.
That's smaller than the
integral over x of f squared.
And now, there are
only a few r's.
So that should be
somewhat smaller
than a log times the
integral over x of r squared.
OK, now the first
thing I might try here
is if you look at the
statement of the main lemma,
it has an upper bound
for the L2 norm of fr.
And I could plug in that upper
bound, and I would bound this.
And I would get
something out of that.
But that's not the
optimal thing to do here.
Well, depending on what
we know about x, depending
on what we know about this.
So to get some intuition,
let's look at this picture
that I haven't
managed to erase yet.
All right.
So we're trying to understand
this thing, the integral over x
of fr squared.
So let's add an
x to our picture.
Do I have any more colors?
So x in this picture
is going to be yellow.
And x may look
something like this.
It depends a little
bit on Nx of r.
If Nx of r, the biggest that
Nx of r could be is r squared.
If it's that big, then x could
fill in this whole thing.
But if Nx of r is
smaller than r squared,
then it's sort of like
the picture that I drew,
and x is only a small
fraction of this ball.
And in this picture, it would be
lossy to estimate the integral
over just x of fr squared
by the global integral of fr
squared, which would include
the whole orange ball.
OK, so we're going to try to do
a bit better than that by using
our lemmas about the
locally-constant property
of the function fr. All right,
I'm going to erase this.
All right.
I'm going to leave this
picture here for our intuition.
All right.
So we have integral
over x of fr squared.
I'll just rewrite it as the
integral of 1x fr squared.
OK, now if I want to use the
locally-constant property of fr
squared, it means I
could use these lemmas.
And in particular,
I can use lemma 2,
which is sort of well set
up to deal with the square.
So this is bounded by the
integral of 1x times fr squared
convolved with cr.
And if you write out what
this is and do Fubini,
this is the same as
the integral of fr
squared times the characteristic
function of x convolved with cr.
Do you see that?
Yeah, OK.
Let's do it.
So the algebra is like this.
I have the integral 1x of x.
And then I have
this convolution,
which is the integral fr
squared of x minus y cr of y dy.
No, let me do it the other way.
OK, so now what happens
if I Fubini that?
That's the integral fr squared
of y integral of 1x of x cr of x
minus y dy.
OK, it doesn't look
quite right yet.
And it actually
reminds me that there
was a little something else
that's helpful to say about cr.
So you can also add
here that cr is radial.
Implies that it's symmetric.
Yeah, I should probably
have mentioned that earlier
in my plan.
So the reason you can
do that, remember,
cr was the Fourier transform
of some bump function eta.
If your bump function
eta is radial,
its Fourier transform
will be radial.
So this guy is
radial and symmetric.
OK, and then because that's
symmetric, I can switch those.
So that's the integral fr
squared of y integral 1x of x,
cr of y minus x.
Sorry, this one is dx.
All right.
So that's the integral of fr
squared of y 1x convolved with
cr of y.
I feel like there also should
be a nice image of what's
going on in this integral.
We have this--
imagine for a second
that this was the
characteristic function a set.
It's not quite true, but
it's not far off either.
So I have one set, and
I have another set.
But before I multiply
them together,
which would mean
intersecting the sets,
I fatten out this set
here by a distance r.
So I take this, I call this set
y, take y, I fatten it out by r,
and I intersect it with x.
And that's kind
of the same thing
as taking x and
fattening it out by r,
and intersecting it with
y, because I could describe
both of them like this.
I'm looking for pairs of
points, 1 in x and 1 and y.
The distance between
them is at most r.
If I say it that
way, it's symmetric.
And that's what's going on here.
Yeah, I guess that's
a fancy way of saying,
I just took this integral
and I wrote it like this.
And now, remember that the
function, cr, is symmetric.
Now the whole thing is
symmetric, symmetric
in exchanging these
two functions.
OK, cool.
OK, so now, we've
written it this way.
And the intuitive
meaning of this
is I've averaged the
characteristic function
of x over balls of radius r.
And so this is bounded by
Nx of r over r squared.
So this is the integral of that
guy over a ball of radius r.
And then I'm taking the average.
So I divide by the area
of the ball of radius r.
OK.
So to check this a little
bit more carefully,
we have to use the bounds that
we have for this cr thing, which
are over here.
So it's bounded by 1 over r
squared on the ball of radius r.
That would give the average.
Then it also has this
rapidly-decaying tail,
which to be careful, we
should take account of.
But what it contributes is
smaller than the first term,
the main term.
OK, so that's how we bound this.
This is now a number.
So we can take it
out of the integral.
And we just have left the
L2 norm of fr squared.
So we plug in our
bound for that.
So we have, it's bounded
by Nx of r over r squared,
you can think of this thing as
the density of x at scale r,
times the integral
of fr squared OK,
and then I just plug in the
bound for the integral of fr
squared.
And we'll write that out.
So OK, we have number of tubes.
We have big r over little r.
We have Nt of r.
That's this thing.
Then we have Nx of r.
And then we have r squared.
OK, we are almost done.
But what we have here is number
of tubes in a little-r-by-big-R
guy.
And the information
we want to be using
is the number of directions.
So the last step is
that the number of tubes
in the little-r-by-big-R
tube is bounded by the number
of directions in a
little-r-over-big-R angle times
little r.
So here's a picture.
Here's our
little-r-by-big-R tube.
Inside of it, I can fit in some
tubes in different directions.
So if I pick one direction,
I can pick little r of them.
That's this little r.
But they don't have
to go that way.
I could also have them go maybe
the most extreme directions.
I could have them go that way.
And this angle here is little r.
The angle there is
little r over big.
So all of the different
tubes that appear here,
they have to have an
angle within a range
of little r over big R. So
the number of directions
is like that.
And then for each
direction, then the number
of possible tubes is
at most, little r.
OK, so if you substitute
this for that,
then this expression becomes the
right-hand side of theorem two.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: I remember
kind of use the fact
that the tubes that
are at an angle,
that you can only
fit less of them in.
Does that change the boundary
of anything different?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, OK.
So the question was if we knew
that in a given direction,
these tubes had to
have some spacing,
so we could also measure
the clustering of the tubes
in a given direction.
So we add some information
about that, then maybe this
would have to be
smaller than little r.
So our setup involves
three things.
But we only thought about the
clustering of two of them.
Our setup involves a
set of unit balls, x,
and we looked at how
it's clustered, Nx of r.
Set of directions,
D. And we look
at how it's
clustered, Nd of rho.
And also, a set of projections,
which each have size
at most S. But we
didn't say anything
about how they were clustered.
So you could add to
this setup something
about how each
projection is clustered.
And you could then use that
to improve this thing here.
Yeah.
So that could be a
little homework project
if anyone is
interested in doing it.
Yeah, OK.
Any other questions or comments?
OK, OK.
So this theorem
sort of naturally
falls out from using
the Fourier method.
But it's a little messy looking.
And the thing that's
particularly messy looking
is this maximum over little
r, and x, and d, da, da, da.
And there's a fairly
general situation
that we mentioned last
time, where that messy bit
gets a lot cleaner.
I don't know that that's so
philosophically important,
but I think it's
worth mentioning.
And this is the way
the results usually
appear in the literature.
All right.
And this will allow us to
finally prove the result
that we stated last time.
All right.
So definition, we say x is
Hausdorff, or Hausdorff spacing.
f and x of r to
the beta is bounded
by around x to the beta for
all beta between 0 and 1.
So when beta is 1,
this is trivial.
This is always true.
But this is saying that
at smaller scales beta,
this x is not too
clumped compared
to how it is at the top scale.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: How is
the [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Ah, sorry.
Thanks.
Yeah, there was one other
thing I forgot to do.
OK, right.
Sorry.
Thanks.
So OK, so the question
is, how did we
actually do all this
algebra and get the equation
that the inequality is
actually stated in theorem two?
And thank you for the
question, because I left out
some of the steps.
OK, so now that we have
done the main ideas,
we're just talking about the
algebra, I will erase this.
And so what do we have so far?
If you put together the
inequalities we have so far,
we have x times the number
of directions squared.
That's where we
started over here.
Then we did some stuff,
and we ended up here.
So that's bounded
by number of tubes
times big R over little r times
Nd little r over big R times r.
That was this thing for there.
And x of r over
little r squared.
And we can cross those guys.
Now we still have
this number of tubes.
What's that?
Well, we have S tubes in each
direction, we have D directions.
So this is S times
D. OK, so now,
I've gotten rid of
all the extra letters.
And we only have
left the letters
that appear in the
inequality we want.
And then the last thing you
do is you get D by itself.
So I take one factor of D,
and bring it over there,
and cancel the two.
Then I take the x and
bring it over here.
And then what's left
is what's there.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: And that's
inequality be made sharp
with any [INAUDIBLE]?
Like in any choice of
S, x, and D [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
Yes.
OK, so the question is, is
this inequality ever sharp?
And it is sometimes sharp,
although not super often.
And the cases that I have worked
out so far when it's sharp
are within this
Hausdorff setting.
So let's maybe do that.
It'll all get a lot simpler.
And then I can say what
the cases I know are.
OK, so the Hausdorff spacing
is a bound on Nx of little
r in terms of the size of
x that looks like this.
And I coined the term,
Hausdorff spacing,
because it comes up naturally
when you talk about Hausdorff
measures and things like that.
OK, and it's useful
in our setting
because if x and D have
Hausdorff spacing, then
when you take the maximum of,
actually many expressions,
but the one that comes up for us
here is this, OK, what happens?
So I assume that both x and
D have Hausdorff spacing.
It's important to
have both of them.
Then each one of
these things get
replaced by some
power of x or D.
And once you have a power law,
so the whole expression will be,
or another way to look at
it is the whole expression
will be some power of little r.
A power could be
positive or negative,
but the maximum will occur
either at 1 or at big R.
So this guy basically is
equal to what happens at 1.
Nx of 1 is always 1.
ND of 1 over r is always 1.
So we just get 1.
And when little r is big R, and
x of big r is all the points,
MD of 1 is all the
directions, And we have that.
So it's less nasty.
And so we get the
following corollary.
So corollary says if
we have our setup,
and x and D have
Hausdorff spacing,
then the number of
directions is bounded by SR
over x times 1 plus SR
over x times this thing.
So SD over r.
OK, now this one has
an interpretation.
If this term dominates, you can
cancel the D's, and it tells you
that S is almost r.
So we get either
S is almost as big
as R. R is the biggest
it could possibly be.
So S is almost as big
as it could possibly be.
Or D is bounded by SR over x.
So that's what we
stated last time.
The formula is not as nasty
as the general formula.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: There's also a factor
of log [INAUDIBLE] theorem two,
because you're choosing R.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yep.
Thanks.
Yeah, so the point
from the audience
was that there was an
extra factor of log R
that I forgot to write down.
So I'll put this
to represent that.
Yeah, thanks.
OK.
OK, so this relatively
clean estimate,
it exactly matches our
theorem two in finite fields.
I won't write it down, but
the numerology is the same.
And it's a little
nicer to look at.
It still takes some digesting.
And this is sharp in some cases.
It's sharp in the case that
S is pretty close to R.
So because I need this,
the smallest I could make
S would be something
like R over log R.
And if you take S around
that, R over log R,
or R to the 1 minus
epsilon, then this
is sharp in the example
of a grid of points,
grid of unit balls.
Yeah, so that's the main
interesting example when--
that's the main example
that I know when it's sharp.
And there are plenty of
examples where it's not sharp.
But that grid
example is important.
Yeah.
OK, I guess it's also
a natural question,
if we go to the regime
that's not Hausdorff,
this theorem added
some junk here
to account for things
being more clustered.
And it's a natural
question, is there
any scenario where this
junk is exactly sharp?
And I wondered about that when
I was working on this lecture.
But I don't know the answer yet.
So if anybody wants
to try, that's
also a nice little project.
Cool.
OK, so that was the
meat of the class.
And that was my discussion that
I planned about the Fourier
method in the real case.
So it's another good
moment to see if you
have questions to digest.
Then we'll start something
a little different.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: For the maximum term,
could you explain why it has
to be a maximum and it's--
the part of the
proof that requires
taking the maximum over,
or instead of, any given r?
LAWRENCE GUTH: So I
think the question is,
why do we have a
maximum over r instead
of maybe like a sum over r?
AUDIENCE: Yeah.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Just where does
the maximum come from?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So you could put
sum over little r.
And the difference
isn't very important,
because the number of
terms is only log of r.
And the log of r has
got absorbed here.
But where did this
come from at all?
Well, we had this
function that's
the sum of all these tubes,
which describes our projection
situation.
And then we are--
the key thing is that we applied
the main lemma to this function.
And the main lemma
said you can break up
this function into a few--
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE]
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
And so one of those pieces
is sort of the important one.
And that's the one that
appears in the maximum.
OK.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Yeah, I'm wondering.
So in the proof, we had to
keep track of all the r's.
In the Hausdorff
spacing case, it
seems like just
there's only two cases.
So I'm wondering if you
do have cluster spacing,
is it really necessary?
Is it still important to
do the static division?
LAWRENCE GUTH: OK,
so the question is,
in the Hausdorff spacing
case, it turned out at the end
of the day, that only two
values of little r mattered
in the final inequality,
namely 1 and capital R.
And the question was, would it
be possible to write the proof
so that only those two appeared
and we didn't have all this
rather complicated business
of keeping track of all
the intermediate little r's?
I don't know any way to do that.
I think the only
way I understand
it is to keep track
of all the little R's,
and then notice that
under these hypotheses,
the intermediate R's are
bounded by the extreme ones.
OK.
OK, so I thought I would say
a little bit about the history
of these ideas.
I haven't been putting
names next to the theorems.
And the reason is
that these theorems
are small variations of
theorems from the literature.
And there are many kind
of related theorems
from the literature.
But let me tell you a little
bit about the history.
I think it's interesting.
I think these are kind
of fundamental ideas.
And they were discovered
independently, or somewhat
independently, by
different people
working on different problems.
So the thing that we have been
calling the Fourier method,
so let's call this history,
the thing that we are calling
the Fourier method
appears in a bunch places,
including the following.
The earliest that I am
aware of is Linnik's work
in sieve theory, which I
will introduce sieve theory
and tell you what
this work was today.
So that was in the 1940s.
The second place I'm aware of
is Roth's work on the Heilbronn
triangle problem, which at some
point in the class probably,
we'll talk about a
little bit, in the '70s.
He knew sieve theory.
He knew Linnik's work well,
and he'd worked on it.
But in this problem, he
did something similar
that's in Euclidean space.
And the setup is
kind of different.
And so I put it on the list.
Then it was something like
this was done by Falconer
in geometric measure theory.
All right.
So Falconer essentially
proved the corollary
that I just erased.
And that was around 1980.
And then it was done by Vinh in
the setting of finite fields.
So lines in Fq2.
And I'm not positive
about this, but I
think that many of these people
were not fully aware of others
of these people.
OK, we also mentioned the
double counting method.
And the double counting
method that we did,
so it was done by Kaufman in
the context of geometric measure
theory in the 1960s.
And it was done by Gallagher in
the context of sieve theory I
think also in the 1960s.
I'm pretty sure that these
two people did not know
what the other one was doing.
And I guess it was probably also
done in the setting of lines
in finite fields in
the '60s or '70s.
But I don't know.
I don't have a reference.
And those people
probably didn't know
about either of these people.
OK, so now, let me tell
you what sieve theory is,
and how it is analogous
to what we've been doing.
OK, so sieve theory takes
place over the integers.
And the main character in sieve
theory is taking the integers
and reducing it modulo
q for different bases q.
OK, so z, of course,
is the integers.
I'm going to write zq for--
some people write z mod qz.
This is the integers modulo q.
And there's a basic map pi sub q
z to zq, which takes an integer
and reduces it modulo q.
OK, this map is going to play
the role of our projections.
So let me mention
what is analogous.
So we've been talking about maps
pi theta that go from R2 to R,
or one-dimensional
subspace, or from Fq2 to Fq.
And now, we're talking
about the map pi cubed
that goes from z to z mod q.
What do all these
things have in common?
They are all group homomorphisms
between abelian groups.
OK, so what we're going
to do in sieve theory
is take a set, which is going
to be now a set of integers,
and think about all the
different projections
of its integer of the
set, and think about
how they're all
related to each other,
and how they're all related
to the original set.
So I have another little
piece of notation.
So this thing is the
numbers from 1 up to n,
which is a subset
of the integers.
And let me illustrate
projection theory.
Let me illustrate sieve theory
with an interesting example
of a set whose projections
behave in a funny way.
OK, so let's do an example.
My example is going to
be basically the set
of square numbers.
So it's going to be the
set of little n squared,
where little n goes from
1 up to big N to the 1/2.
So it's a subset of the
integers from 1 to N.
And the cardinality is
about the square root of N.
What happens when I
reduce this set modulo p?
So if p is prime,
when I take pi p of x,
I get the quadratic residues.
And the number of quadratic
residues is p plus 1 over 2.
So about half.
So that's kind of an
interesting and surprising fact.
Of course, if p is bigger
than square root of N,
obviously, the size of this
projection is smaller than x.
So I might not even get
all the quadratic residues
if I take a big P.
That's not surprising.
But I could take p significantly
less than the square root of N.
And then when I do
this projection,
I only hit half of the
elements in z mod p,
and I hit each of
those many times.
That's not something that's
likely to happen randomly.
It's kind of striking.
So one sample question
from sieve theory
is, how big could a set x be
and have all of its projections
be small like this?
And what examples are there?
How many sets like
this can you find?
All right.
So using his ideas
about sieve theory,
one of the things
that Linnik did
was to answer some
of this question.
So theorem of Linnik
in the 1940s says,
if I have a subset of
the integers from 1 to N,
and if pi p of x is at most,
p plus 1 over 2 for every P.
So there's nothing so
special about this.
We could put other
things here, but I'm just
using this to compare
with the squares.
Then the conclusion is that the
size of x is at most around N
to the 1/2.
So it says that the
square numbers are just
about the biggest set
with this property.
Cool.
So we will give
two proofs of this.
We'll give a proof
using double counting,
and we'll give a proof
using the Fourier method.
There are lots of hard open
problems in sieve theory.
And one of them is to understand
what the examples are.
So the only known examples,
only known examples
where this theorem
is roughly tight
are the square numbers
and close cousins.
So sorry.
It's messy.
The square numbers, and close
cousins of the square numbers.
You could replace this
with another degree 2
polynomial in little n.
And it's not hard to see
it's kind of equivalent.
And those are all the examples.
OK, but people know
basically nothing
about classifying the examples.
Cool.
OK, so we'll give
two proofs of this,
one based on double
counting, and one
based on the Fourier method.
Double counting, I
think, we can do today.
And the Fourier method, we'll
do next time, next week.
And first of all, I think that
these results are pretty cool.
But I also hope that you see
that they're really extremely
parallel to the results in
geometric measure theory
that we've just
been talking about.
OK.
OK, let me make a little
remark before we start.
So I'm going to focus
on projections mod p,
where p is a prime.
You could also reduce mod
q, where q is not a prime.
And all of the ideas still work.
It's a little bit
more complicated
because if you take two
numbers, q1 and q2 that share
a common factor, then reducing
mod q1 and reducing mod q2
are kind of related
to each other.
And so if you write
everything down,
you have to keep track of that.
That's just an extra
thing to keep track of.
And not so difficult,
but it makes
everything a little longer,
and more complicated.
And sometimes, you might want
to do that, but in applications.
But just to show the ideas,
I'm going to focus on mod p.
OK.
All right.
So here's the double
counting method.
So I'll call it theorem 1S.
So it says if x is a subset
of the numbers from 1 to N,
and D is a set of primes
less than or equal to N,
and for every p in
our set of primes,
pi sub p of x is less
than or equal to S,
then we get a conclusion.
Either x is bounded by 2S, or
the number of directions is
bounded roughly by S. So I
guess this is most interesting
if the number of directions is
significantly bigger than S.
So if we look at the squares, so
suppose I know that pi p of x is
bounded by p plus 1 over 2.
So that's my S. And
I need to do this--
yeah, let's see.
Well, this may not
quite work for this.
Right.
Actually, I'm not sure if this
will imply Linnik's theorem.
Linnik proved his theorem
with the Fourier method.
Let's come back
to that next time.
I think we have just enough time
to do the nice double counting
argument and then do
the Fourier next time.
OK, so proof, we're going
to count coincidences.
That's the set of
x1, and x2, and x,
and p in our set of
directions, or a set of primes
so that pi p of x1
equals pi p of x2.
OK, so we'll count this
two different ways.
One is a lower bound.
So star is at least for
every direction, when
I do this projection,
there are only S images.
So a typical image has
x over S preimages.
Square that for my
choice of x1 and x2,
and then multiply
by S for the number
of choices of the projection.
So that's x squared D S inverse.
OK, now what's our upper bound?
So now, imagine
fixing x1 and x2.
And think about how many
P's can satisfy this.
OK, so if I have pi p of
x1 is equal to pi p of x2,
that tells us that p
divides x2 minus x1.
And there can't be that
many different primes
that divide x2 minus x1.
x2 minus x1 has size n.
So it could be, at most,
log of N that do this.
So star is upper
bounded by, OK, so there
is a case where x1 equals x2.
So that gives me x times
the number of directions.
And then if x1 is
not equal to x2,
I have x squared
choices for x1 and x2.
But I have only log of N
choices for the direction.
OK, and now, I'll compare
these to each other.
OK, so I have x squared
times D times S inverse is
less than x times D plus
x squared times log N.
So there are two cases.
If this one dominates, then I
would have that x is bounded
by 2S.
Or if this one dominates,
then the x's disappear,
and I get that D is bounded
by log of N times S.
And that's the theorem.
OK, so let me give
you an example of this
and argue that this is--
well, I'll give you
an example, a flavor
of what this is telling us.
So suppose that pi p of x is
bounded by N to the 2/3 for 10
log n times n to
the 2/3 different p.
So if that's true, then the
theorem tells us that x is
bounded by N to the 2/3.
So these primes might
have size around this big,
or a bit bigger.
So these primes are much less
than N. So each projection,
the fact that each projection
one at a time is small,
it's not that convincing
in terms of x being small.
But knowing that all
of these projections,
or this large number of
projections is small,
it means that x is
really that small.